# Replenishment

In Odoo, stock can be replenished one of three ways: *reordering rules*,
the *make to order* (MTO) route, or using the *master production
schedule* (MPS).

Each replenishment mechanism triggers the creation or suggestion of a
purchase order (PO) or manufacturing order (MO), with the best choice
depending on the business process.

:::::: cards
::: 
Reordering rules

Automatically suggest or generate POs or MOs when stock falls below a
minimum level.
:::

::: 
MTO

Automatically generate POs or MOs when sales orders are confirmed.
:::

::: 
MPS

Manage long-term replenishment based on inputted sales forecasts, via a
dashboard.
:::
::::::

## Replenishment strategies

### Replenishment report and reordering rules

Reordering rules are rules that can be set up to maintain a minimum
stock level. They are often configured to support manufacturing or sales
requirements. When a product\'s stock falls at or below the minimum
level, Odoo generates (or suggests) a purchase or manufacturing order to
replenish stock to the maximum level.

When using automatic reordering rules, Odoo generates a new order. When
using manual, Odoo suggests orders on the replenishment report. For
detailed guidance, refer to the `replenishment report
` and
`reordering rules `.

Key points include:

- `Automatic reordering rules `: Automatically create
  `POs (Purchase Orders)` or
  `MOs (Manufacturing Orders)` when stock
  falls below the minimum level. While this is convenient, it is less
  flexible.
- `Manual reordering rules `: Generate suggestions in the replenishment report for user
  review, allowing adjustments and batch orders while meeting deadlines.
- `Just-in-time logic `: A strategy to replenish only what is needed to prevent
  overstocking.


### Make to order 

An `MTO (Make to Oder)` strategy means
that procurement or production is triggered only after a sales order has
been confirmed. This strategy is recommended when products are
customizable, demand is unpredictable, there is limited storage
capacity, and when products are high in value and low in demand. In such
cases, it does not make sense to keep on-hand inventory.

Unlike products replenished using reordering rules, Odoo automatically
links the sales order to the `PO (Purchase Order)` or `MO (Manufacturing Order)` generated by the `MTO (Make to Oder)` route.

Another difference between reordering rules and
`MTO (Make to Oder)` is, with
`MTO (Make to Oder)`, Odoo generates a
draft `PO (Purchase Order)` or
`MO (Manufacturing Order)` immediately
after the `SO (Sales Order)` is
confirmed. With reordering rules, Odoo generates a draft
`PO (Purchase Order)` or
`MO (Manufacturing Order)` when the
product\'s forecasted stock falls below the set minimum quantity.

In addition, Odoo automatically adds quantities to the
`PO (Purchase Order)` or
`MO (Manufacturing Order)` as the
forecast changes, so long as the `PO (Purchase Order)` or `MO (Manufacturing Order)` is not confirmed.

The `MTO (Make to Oder)` route is the
best replenishment strategy for products that are customized, and/or for
products that have no stock kept on-hand.


### Master production schedule

The `MPS (Master Production Schedule)` is
a dashboard where products and their forecasted quantities are entered.
Based on confirmed manufacturing and purchase orders, the dashboard
recommends amounts to order or produce.

This a useful **manual** tool for keeping track of quantities. The
`MPS (Master Production
Schedule)` **should absolutely not** be
used alongside reordering rules, as the automated workflow disrupts its
manual replenishment method.


::: 
replenishment/mto replenishment/reordering_rules replenishment/report
replenishment/lead_times replenishment/resupply_warehouses
:::
